The warfare that went on wiped out the
two barriers to communist expansion in
Asia. Shankai, the Japanese wipe him
out. And then what does the United
States do? What's the other barrier to
communism? Well, it's the Japanese. So,
what do you get? A unified communist
China. It's a gift that keeps on giving.
Japanese remnants would go headlong into
oncoming machine gun fire knowing full
well what was going to happen. This is
not the way other armies have behaved.
Japan thought their entire existence was
at stake. that they absolutely had to
have territory in China to survive. Not
only do I want to do regime change, but
I want to kill all your people while I'm
at it. If you compromise with them, you
are simply setting them up and putting
them in a stronger position when they
come at you for the final kill.
Before I get going, I've got to make a
disclaimer. What I'm saying are my
ideas. They don't necessarily represent
the US government, the US Navy
Department, the US Department of
Defense, let alone where I work, the
Naval War College. You got it? This is
just me here. Nobody else.
All right. Americans have a penchant for
what I call halfcourt tennis which is
they like to analyze international
affairs and uh wars by focusing on team
America what Americans did or didn't do
and then that explains causation and in
the world and Americans on the other
hand their beloved sport I believe is
football and those people who love
football many Americans my understanding
of it I'm just an someone who reads
books I don't follow football. But now
that's just qualifying, I suppose. But
anyhow, Americans who follow football,
they study both sides, right? They look
at their home team, but then they also
look at uh not just one opposing team,
but many down to the individual player,
and they would no more follow the
football game by looking at one half of
the football field. And yet Americans,
when we do foreign policy, that's often
what we do. And it gets us into all
kinds of trouble. For instance, in the
Iraq war, uh, Americans thought that the
Republican Guard was going to be really
tough, and it turns out it wasn't so
tough. But then there was this post, uh,
conventional phase insurgency that went
on and on and on that surprised
Americans. Well, the problem isn't
actually a new one. In World War II,
Americans were terribly surprised by the
thing that Japanese did. Uh, starting
with Pearl Harbor, right? That was a
surprise. but also was the entire way
the Japanese fought the war, the way
they fought to the last man, the
suicides, the brutality, not only to the
PW civilians, but into their own
wounded. And the question is, is there
any way to anticipate in advance how
other people are going to behave? Uh, is
there any way to get a sense of the
other sides of of the tennis court? Now,
here are the two gurus of warfare. One
is Sununzu for uh in Asia and the other
one Clausitz is the big guru of warfare
in the west and both of them would say
hey you want to understand the other
side you got to make a net assessment
what's that you would look at political
military geographic economic factors the
strengths and weaknesses of all sides to
get a sense of things and today I'm
going to make a case for culture you
need to look at that as well and it's
often said that mirror imaging is not
what you're supposed to do. What's
mirror imaging? It's uh we get into a
situation and then I decide what I think
you're going to do based on what I would
do. I project me a mirror image on you.
And that doesn't work so well. Okay. If
I'm not supposed to generalize on the
basis of my experience, what am I
supposed to do instead? And I'm going to
get at this problem today. how you
analyze the other side of the tennis
court net by looking at a Japanese
behavior in the 30s and 40s. But the
method of analysis I'm using you could
apply to anyone you want. You want to uh
think about Russians today or whatever,
you can apply it that way. So culture,
it's important, but it's as amorphous as
it is important. For instance, if I'm
going to try to figure out the defining
characteristics of another culture,
it would be difficult to figure out what
the list is of all the different things
I would need to look at. And even if I
could come up with that list,
still how would I figure out how um that
would work in something like uh warfare?
Hard to know. But the difficulty of the
problem doesn't make it go away. And so,
um, I'm we're going to look at it today
and, uh, we're going to look, uh, look
at Japanese theorists and belief systems
and that if you believe these things,
how this influences your, uh, your
practice. Tojo Hideki said in December
1st, 1941 that our country stands on the
threshold of glory or oblivion. He got
that right. And he's in an imperial
conference where he is confirming with
Hirohito that Pearl Harbor is going to
be a go. But he felt that Japan really
needed to do something rather than being
ground down being passive. And here is
Admiral Yamamoto Isodoku who was the man
who came up with the operational plan
for Pearl Harbor. He thought it had
really long odds of being successful.
General Tojo gave it a 50/50 chance.
Admiral Yamamoto wasn't even sure that
it was that good, but he felt it was the
best possible plan for Japan to get out
of its predicament. Now, from a western
point of view, this is makes no sense.
Uh, you're talking about getting the
United States potentially into a war
with Japan that's already overextended
in China. Who does this? Uh, either you
need to ratchet back the policy
objective and or you need to downgrade
your strategy to something a little more
costly or risky. And I suppose what you
can do is go, "Oh, they're stupid."
Okay, I guess if I call you stupid, that
makes me so smart because I can
denigrate you. Uh, explains nothing. So
rather than do that, it's they're very
uh intelligent men and why are they
doing these these why do they consider
their actions rational and rational in
what context? So this is what I'm going
to be up to and I can start with a
little story to illustrate my point. In
the summer of 1943,
this is after the battles of the
Solomons, New Guinea, Guad Canal,
they're all over with. The Imperial
Japanese Army had a war college and
instructor comes into class one day and
he says from now on the curriculum's
changed. The main emphasis is going to
be countering US tactics instead of what
they had been teaching was Soviet
tactics and will become the A course. If
anyone can teach this, go ahead because
I don't know a damn thing about it. Uh,
talk about being unprepared for seminar.
Uh, and then think about it. Where are
the Japanese actually fighting most of
the time? What is the country that most
matters to them at the end of the day?
It would be China. And that's not what
their war colleges are studying.
Something's up here. Now, they're
clearly making a really bad net
assessment about the United States.
Okay. This country also is known for
lousy net assessments. I don't believe
ours about Vietnam was particularly good
either. And that's one part of the
problem. So here's my game plan for this
evening. I'm first going to talk about
Japanese traditional ma Japanese
theorists and then it's going to be
talking about Japanese practice. How if
you have this belief system, how
explanatory it is is it for practice.
This is my game plan right now. So the
Japanese don't have just the one book
like Sununza's the art of war or
Clausowitz's on war. What they have is
Bushido Code of the Samurai. It's a
whole literature and it was written in
the Tokagawa period which quite
ironically was a period known for peace
not warfare never mind. And what's
interesting about this literature from a
western perspective, it's really not
about military strategy. It's about
deport. how a samurai should conduct
himself. And this reflects Japanese
values and and what the things that they
emphasize. And so I'm going to go
through it with you. Here's the game
plan on the theorists. First, I'm going
to talk about the philosophical origins
of Bushidto, then the values that
underpin it, and then the operational
preferences that grow out of it. That's
the game plan for first half. And I'm
going to use as my cultural bridge this
man Nito Inazo who wrote a book much
later in 1900 Bushido's soul of Japan.
Why am I doing this? He provides a
concise definition of Bushido. And you
can see he's an important figure in
Japan. Not everybody gets their mug on
the 5,000 yen note. So he's an important
figure in Japan. He had spent 18 years
abroad
and he had higher educ received higher
education in Japan and a variety of
western institutions. He married,
believe it or not, I don't make up these
things. Uh a Philadelphia Quaker and he
converted to Christianity and he spent
his life trying to serve as a cultural
bridge and that's how I'm going to use
him today. And what he said is unlike in
the west where notions of morality come
from religion in Japan they come from
bushido. And what is it? It's a code of
chivalous code of honor for the warrior
class. These precepts of knighthood. Uh
there are three pillars of bushido
according to neto bay. They're Buddhism,
Shinto and Confucianism.
From Buddhism is where you see Japanese
fatalism the origin of it. And here you
have Neto saying it's this calm trust in
fate a quiet submission to the ev
inevitable of friendliness with death.
And it strikes westerners reading
um this bushidto literature is a pre
preoccupation with death. uh that uh for
instance, Clausitz will talk about um
violence in warfare, but he's not
interested in what constitutes an
honorable death, let alone
choreographing a a soldier's final
moments. Different culture. And from
Buddhism, there are uh four noble truths
of Buddhism. One is that existence is
suffering, pessimistic view of this
life. Second, it's caused by craving and
attachment. So, don't cling to this life
uh or the things in it. It's all
ephemeral. It's like a cherry blossom.
Blooms for a day and then it's gone. And
but there's a a there's a a a good
ending to it all, which is nirvana. And
how do you get there? The the fourth uh
noble truth is through forms of right
conduct. So, the emphasis isn't on what
you achieve in your life. It's how you
lead it. It's a focus on department.
It's different from the west. Second
pillar is Shinto is this extreme
patronism, reverence for the emperor.
And the third pillar is Confucianism.
These imported ideas from China.
Confucianism is at heart of how it's
organizing a society and regulating it
through interlocking social obligations,
hierarchical, and through ritual and
etiquette. So in the west there's much
talk about uh equality, right? And um in
in the west in the east it's duty. It's
what you owe other people. In the east
there is no such thing as a social in
China in Japan of of equality even even
twins have a birth order. And it's not
about freedom either. It's it's about
what you owe others. So uh if you think
that these value system seems really
different. Yeah. No kidding. has nothing
to do with the Greco Roman
Judeo-Christian West. Completely
different value system. And so, Alice,
welcome to Wonderland. Buckle up. We're
off for a ride. And I'm going to start.
Here's my first piece of the Tokagawa
literature. Yamamotosmo's
the Hagaur that he wrote in the early
18th century. It translates variously as
hidden leaves, hidden by the leaves. And
in it uh he is describing I'm going to
read you some s short passages from it
all. What was he? He was a retainer for
a daimo a feudal lord in Japan. He
hadn't actually done any fighting even
though he's writing all about it. So if
you if you don't do what do you do? You
publish. And
I will and I will tell you what the man
had to say. So here we go. One of the
first things is this preoccupation with
death. And here's Yamamoto. The way of
the samurai is imagining the most
sightly way of dying. Merit lies more in
dying for one's master than in striking
down the enemy. The way of the samurai
is found in death. It is not necessary
to gain one's aim, but if you live on
without achieving it, it's cowardice.
However, if you don't game your aim and
die, that's okay.
This is really different from Clausowitz
where it's all about achieving the
policy objective. It's not about uh how
the how the soldier is leading his life.
And here you can see the consequences of
this, right? If you're focusing on uh no
fears of death and if you can't succeed,
living on is a disaster. Think of the
bonsai charges when Japanese remnants
would go headlong into oncoming machine
gun fire knowing full well what was
going to happen.
Uh this is not the way other armies have
behaved. Different value system.
All right. In addition to at death the
spushidal literature's emphasis on
honor. Back to Yamamoto. The way of
avoiding shame is different. It's simply
death. Even if it seems certain that you
will lose, retaliate. Think of General
Tojo and Admiral Ya Yamamoto Yodoku.
Now, and here's the if you suffer a
catastrophic defeat, here's the
solution. Uh in the event of a
mortifying failure, uh you're going to
wind up committing suicide because the
alternative, if you live on in shame,
you're bringing everyone you're
associated with shame. And I'm going to
use Neto Bay to be the cultural bridge.
She said in our minds this mode of death
is associated with the instances of
noblelest deeds and most touching pthos.
So this vilest form of death assumes a
sublimity and becomes a symbol of new
life. It's a way to des escape from
disgrace.
And in Japanese literature there is the
tragic hero who is pursuing noble but
unattainable aims. and rather than
making disagreeable compromises goes
down in flames. This is what seepu is
all about. And Neto is saying look death
involving a question of honor was
accepted in Bushidto as a key solution
to many complex problems. And you can
think in World War II, yeah, it was
complex problems like battle plans not
working out and a war that was truly not
working out. All right. So, in addition
to death and suicide, uh, and honor,
we've got loyalty. It's another key
value. And back to Yamamoto, being a
good retainer is nothing other than
being a supporter of one's lord. A man
is a good retainer to the extent that he
earnestly places importance in his
master. Having only wisdom and talent is
the lowest tier of usefulness. So much
for Silicon Valley.
Uh for a warrior, there is nothing other
than thinking of his master. And so back
in the day, it's thinking of your flu
feudal lord. In more recent times, it's
prioritizing your company over family.
In China, it's the reser reverse
priority. It's family over company. And
it it's different cultures, different
priorities. All right? There are
strategic implications. If this is your
value system, this is what arises from
it. First of all, you're looking at
damage limitation, damage control, not
in terms of the physical cost of losing
lives, having property blown up, but in
terms of honor.
Also, there's an equa a tendency to
equate operational with strategic
success. Operational success is I win
this battle here and now. Strategic
success is okay, we're in a war for some
reason. What is the reason you're in the
war? uh Japan's reasons for being in
China had to do with containing
communist expansion and also stabilizing
the place so that they they could make
money out of business. So that's your
strategic objective. It's not your
operational one. But the Japanese
samurai are equating the two saying if I
take this hill somehow it's
automatically going to deliver the
strategic objective and in fact they won
most of the battles in China but they
lost that war. Also there's this focus
on what constitutes an honorable death.
It's not the western focus of literature
is all about preparing the field of
battle and advance for success. And
whereas this literature is all what to
is focusing on what to do after
disaster.
So that here are some more implications.
Once the Japanese are failing in battle,
operational failure, they are on death
ground. What does that mean? It means
that
uh death ground means the only way you
survive if you is if you fight harder.
Like it's it's um this is what's going
on in Ukraine right now is that when you
decide you're going to annihilate an
entire culture, you put people on death
ground and then they have very few
choices on what they do next. Uh that
one uh is
means for the Japanese to feel that
they're on death ground when they're
failing means they're not going to give
up. they're going to fight brutally uh
against overwhelming odds. So in the
west when we like to mirror image we
want to think of the rational actor with
some kind of mathematically based cost
benefit of when you should give up when
the costs have just are are so high
above whatever your value of the object
is. You ought to call it quits. Well
that kind of calculation does not
translate well across the the divides
between civilizations. I've got a nice
picture here of Lieutenant Onod who had
been hanging out in Philippine jungles
for what 30 years after the end of the
war carrying on the war in isolation. I
don't believe this is how most other
armies work or soldiers in them.
Different culture, different things you
do with your life. And here is Sir
William Slim Field Marshall, British
14th Army that he led in Burma,
commenting on his experiences. If 500
Japanese were ordered to hold a
position, we had to kill 495. Last five
committed suicide before we could take
the place. And it was this combination
of obedience and ferocity that made the
Japanese so formidable.
Uh, okay. This brings me to another
value that's emphasized in Bushidto
willpower. Back to Yamamoto. There is
nothing that cannot be done. The way of
the samuris and desperateness simply
become insane and desperate and it'll
somehow work out for you. And one can
accomplish any feat. Think of Pearl
Harbor. And this emphasis on willpower
and just trying harder. It denigrates
strategy. And here you see a picture of
the supreme example of honor and loyalty
and willpower. And they're kamicazi
pilots. But if this is what you're
doing, you're denigrating strategy. And
here Yamamoto is me talking about
tactics, but it has operational and
strategic implications. He says,
"Learning such things as military
tactics is useless. The way of the
samurai is one of immediiacy and it is
best to dash in headlong." Uh if one
were informed of military tactics, he
would have many doubts. So the idea is
if you think about these things in peace
time, you'll start uh hesitating in
wartime. It won't work out for you if
you do this. uh during times of peace
when listening to stories of battle we
should never say in facing such a
situation what would a person do well so
much for my job at the naval war college
so much for the case studies uh no
matter what the circumstances might be
once you be of the mind to win one
should you be holding the first uh spear
to strike so here's the implications if
you believe this what you're doing it's
very unanalytical way to approach wars
it's all about whatever it is you want
you just steal the will and go for it
and somehow you'll get it if you want.
There's a lack of grand strategy. What's
grand strategy? It's imple it's
integrating all the instruments of
national power not just the army or the
army and the navy which is what the
Japanese are trying to do. But all
instruments of national power in pursuit
of if the bigger aim is to stabilize
China and keep the communists out. There
ought to be some diplomacy and some
other things going on. But that's not
what's happening in the samurai
literature. It's a focus on the military
ex uh instrument exclusively. So I'll
give you an example of how this works
out. In before the Imperial Japanese
Army and the Imperial Japanese Navy
invaded French Indo-China, neither one
of them did a little study saying, "Hey,
if we do that, let's check the other
side of the tennis court and see what
other people how they might react." They
just steal the well and march right on
in. Okay, that triggered the US 100% oil
embargo.
That's a problem. Strate uh strate uh
operational success strategic mess. So
it is this focusing on just the
operational level is the it's the basis
for this ill-founded operation uh
optimism with which the Japanese just
took territory after territory without
saying hey what about the cost of
actually occupying these places and oh
we're going for these places for
resources so maybe we ought to check it
out with the finance ministry and others
in about in how are we ever going to get
these resources back home. None of
that's going on. It's a disaster for
them. Okay, I'm going to talk about a
couple of secondary theorists. One of
them is Taoshig Suk, who is a
contemporary of Yamamoto because he
provides a really concise definition of
the operative values of samurai culture.
Only three things are considered
essential: loyalty, duty, and valor. So
steadfastly loyal uh in battle as to
disregard his own life. what he's
actually talking about is group loyalty.
In the west, the basic unit composing so
society is the individual. Well, in the
east, it's the group and group interests
take uh primacy over individual
interests. And for the Japanese society
is divided by in-groups and outroups.
The most basic inroup, biggest
overarching one is the Japanese people
visav everybody else. But within Japan,
everybody comes from a different
province, a different locality. Uh they
go to different educational institutes.
They graduate from different
kindergarten classes, I kid you not, and
college classes. They if they work for
different companies or they work for the
or they're in the military, they're in
different branches. And you also have
family loyalties. And you owe each of
these nested and overlapping groups
different obligations.
And sometimes these obligations conflict
and if they're really the conflict's
really awful, that's another reason for
committing suicide. And then if you look
at the Japanese language, the moment a
person opens their mouth to speak to
another Japanese, you can immediately
listen to the grammatical forms that are
being used, the specific word choices to
know what's the degree of hierarchy,
like where do they sit in this unequal
hierarchy and whether it's inroup,
outgroup. So everybody feels or most
people feel some level of group loyalty.
This is human. But in Japan, it's the
levels of membership are much more
finely calibrated and they're
re-emphasized by these social, cultural,
and linguistic reasons. So this group
membership and stove piping ultimately
is going to be a much uh stronger
feature of Japanese culture than some
other places. All right, last theorist
is Miamoto Mousashi who unlike the other
two actually did a little fighting. He
was born a little earlier and he was a
master of samurai who taught people
martial arts and from him you get a
sense of some of the operational
preferences deriving from these values
and I'm going to go through all of these
in turn. First is risk and tolerance
because remember at the beginning I I
started with the two flag officers
saying well we're going to do this war
in the Pacific when it's unlikely we're
going to succeed but we're going to do
it anyway. And here is uh Miiamoto.
Furthermore, to fight even five or 10
people single-handedly in duels, uh
that's what my military science is all
about. So, what's the difference between
the logic of one person beating up uh 10
people and uh a thousand people beating
10,000? Uh logistics, my friend, but
never mind.
Uh and then another thing that he
emphasizes in in addition don't expect
long odds to deter uh the Japanese back
in the day. Surprise is another one.
Think about a situation that has
stalemated and is going nowhere, which
is what the China theater was for the
Japanese. And how do you get out of it?
And the answer that Miiamoto has is not
come up with a new policy objective, but
come up with a tactic that'll somehow
put your enemy off balance and then get
what you want that way. And the way the
Japanese did this was often by opening a
new theater in a war, by surprising
people by the new places that you were
going to start engaging in military
operations. Uh, and here's how it
worked. China had been a failed state
since 1911 and it had had an escalating
series of warlords fighting each other
in this multilateral civil war and the
Japanese were appalled particularly
after the United States passed the Holy
Smoot tariff of 1930 that cut them off
from international trade. So then
they're thinking now what? Well, we're
going to need an emp empire big enough
to survive since no one's going to trade
with us. And so they invade all of
Manuria in 1931. They have it pretty
much stabilized by 1933.
Uh so okay, that was surprise number
one. But the rest of China is a mess.
And the Japanese it's coalesing into a
bilateral communist nationalist
nationalist under Shanghai communist
under Maoong fight with increasing
dosages of Soviet aid. And the Japanese
are appalled with all this. And so it's
time to surprise everybody again. in
1937. And that's when they invade all
the way down the Chinese coast and up
the Yangza River. And it works. They
they take a lot of territory really
fast, but then they get to the end of
the railway system. Oh, and by the way,
China's not pacified. It's just
churning. And so now Japan is even more
overextended. As a result of doing that,
Russian aid goes up and then you're
going to get US aid in there. So the
problem's actually getting worse. Okay,
time for another surprise. really big
one. Uh on that infamous day in December
41, it wasn't just Pearl Harbor, that's
Team America focusing only on Team
America, the Japanese attacked all
across the Pacific that day. Uh okay,
now what? Here the United uh China had
never been able to threaten the Japanese
home islands. Well, the United States
here the United States was totally
isolationist. Most Americans couldn't
find Japan on the na map. Well, after
Perth Pearl Harbor, they sure could. And
they suddenly the United States isn't
isolationist anymore. And they're coming
to get the Japanese. So, you can see the
samurai values in operation here. Just
try harder. More dosages of willpower.
Eventually, you'll win or you'll die
trying. Okay. Another operational
preference that you can see which is
these pre as part of the surprise or
preemptive attacks. And this is how
Japan began all of its wars. the first
SinoJapanese war and the second
SinoJapanese war, RussoJapanese War and
the Pacific War. This is how all of them
begin. And finally, Miiamoto offers some
advice on how you break the enemy will
par. And in this case, it's you've
already won conventionally,
but they're waging an insurgency against
you. I'm modernizing the terminology.
And the idea is it's you want a
psychological victory. You want them
just to quit and somehow you're going to
break their will to resist. And I
suspect this is what the Japanese
thought they were doing in the rape of
Nenzing and other atrocities that they
were going to do these horrifying things
and that would break the will of the
other side. Okay. Be careful whom you
put on death ground.
uh the Japanese were repeating a mistake
done by the Nazis which is uh if you're
dealing with even a failing state which
Russia was the shot Stalin had shot so
many of his officers in the 30s and then
he inflicted a famine on Ukraine
uh but when the Nazis came in and they
were going to wipe out not only the
Russian government but also the Russian
people you will superglue people
government and military and you will
transform a failing state into a lethal
adversary. And this is what Nazi
brutality does to Russians, what
Japanese brutality does to Chinese, and
what Russian brutality today is doing to
Ukraine. Don't do it. Bad strategy. All
right. There are strategic implications
from these values. One is this emphasis
of on the offensive preeemption. It's
emphas
to solve all your problems. And you have
a fixed policy objective, whatever it
is. It's and if you're in a given
battle, you have to win that battle.
It's not, oh, I have an overarching
objective. It's too costly here. I'm
going to call off this battle and I'm
going to try again somewhere else.
Uh-uh. This your fa the moment your plan
is failed, you're a failure. So they're
not thinking of planning in terms of
branches of sequels and there'll be un
uh unexpected events that take place
you'll adapt to. None of that you're a
failure. Funny that stuff happens to
you. So there's a real insensitivity to
risk and uh there's no grand strategy,
but if you believe these things, you
will be lethal in warfare. You're not
going to give up easily at all. And so
you you look at the Japanese at the end
of the war and go, why do they quit a
lot earlier? Well, it's because they in
a way they're already dead men. They
suffered social death. And so they're
going to keep on uh until the very very
end of all of this. And it's a great sin
of omission, this absence of grand
strategy. The Japanese aren't the only
ones to have done this. the belligerents
on all sides in World War I uh were
thinking all of in terms of using the
military instrument got themselves into
trouble. So if you look at what the
Japanese were doing, they had some vague
ambitions and wanted to take advantage
of opportunities, but there's no
definition of what win in this war is.
How much territory should Japan take and
then call it a day and say done or it's
been successful here. uh rather their
territorial uh acquisitions are really a
function of what they were able to take
and what in anger they did take but also
a function of strategic failure. No
matter what they did it never pacified
the the China theater problem for them.
Okay, that Alice that was wonderland.
Now, we're going to get to how it works,
how other people live, of if you believe
these things, how does it help explain
what actually happened in in World War
II? And I'm going to start with two sins
of omission. The Japanese neglect of
paying more careful consideration to
logistics. And then another sin of
omission is an neglect of of protecting
their sea lines of communication. And
then I'm going to the last two are about
these in-group uh outgroup divisions and
the problems it called caused for within
each military service intraervice
rivalries and then between the two
services the navy and the army in the
war that caused them such difficulties.
Okay. The Japanese if you start at the
the beginning of the war Japan never
produced more than 113th US steel and
coal production. It never did more than
a 10% of what unit US munitions
productions were. I I believe if you do
the math and take all the battleships
and divide people into everything that
each US soldier had four tons of
equipment per whereas each Japanese
soldier had about two pounds of
equipment. Japanese main weapons in this
war were the grenade and the bayonet.
their artillery and machine guns were
totally were very obsolete what they had
going into the Pacific War. And then you
flip it around and look at the United
States. Uh the United States had about
18 men in supply or men and women but
mostly men in supply services supporting
each rifleman at the front. Other
militaries in this period had about an
8:1 ratio. Japan had about a 1:1. So
Japan's already suffering food shortages
before Pearl Harbor. And then when you
get to the winter of 194243,
the Japanese are having critical
shortages of oil. So they no longer can
deploy the fleet at will. That means you
you forget about convoying anything
because you just haven't got the the oil
to do it. And yet by when you get to 45
they have when they're predicting
they're going to have absolutely zero
aviation fuel and other fuel by the end
of 45 you have the government saying
still we're going to fight on for this
honorable whatever it's going to be uh
these bushidto uh ideas of that you you
just persevere loyalty honor duty keep
going all right I'm going to be quoting
this gentleman's diary Admiral Ugaki
Mato he was the chief of the staff of
the combined fleet until his plane and
Admiral Yamamoto, Isuroko's plane were
shot down. US code breaking was quite
good. We figured out where they were and
uh we killed um Admiral Yamamoto, but
this man survived and by the time he
wrote this entry, he was the head of an
airfleet in uh on the home islands
sending kamicazi flights out because
Japan simply lacked the ability uh to do
too much else. this late in the day. And
here is his last diary entry written on
August 15th, 1945.
This is after two atomic dram bombs had
been dropped and after the Russians had
deployed into Manuria. and he said okay
there are various causes for today's
tragedy and I feel that my own
responsibility is not light but more
fundamentally it was due to the great
differences in natural of national
resources between the two countries
okay it's too late to come to that
conclusion
US production statistics had been on the
books forever but the when Japanese read
these numbers they thought they were
ludicrously high and discounted them as
propag propaganda and uh those who knew
better, who' done tours of duty in
Britain or the United States, they
weren't promoted because they were
defeists. I believe that Admiral uh
Ugaki kept and maintained his diary is
because he was an honorable samurai. He
had believed in Bushidto, the ability of
material of willpower to more than
compensate for inferior resources. But
the war's outcome had proved him
incorrect. And so, as an honorable
samurai, he paid with his life, and he
kept his diary to nothing to be ashamed
of. He'd done what he was going to do.
Here I have the last prime minister of
Imperial Japan, Prince Higashi Kuni
Nhiko, talking about his take on the
war. He said, "I think the basic cause
of defeat was a loss of transport
shipping." Okay. Uh by the end of the
war, Japan was down to one ninth of its
transport shipping. It meant the empire
was paralyzed. What's the point of
taking all these territories if you
can't get the resources back? the AR the
Navy had always focused on the uh
mission by Alfred the Mahan who is from
where I work back in the day was all
about fleet fleet engagements and things
uh but it turns out that uh the the NA
the Japanese Navy hadn't focused on
convoy duty. Mahan called that a
promising secondary operation. Actually,
it turned out to be primary in the
Pacific that US submarine services
paralyzed their sea lines of
communication. Go submarines. But um so
here's uh Admiral uh Ugaki Matame who is
talking he eventually comes around to
recom recommending a more defensive
strategy of not having this fleet on
fleet because they don't have they've
lost a lot of the fleet and then they
don't have the fuel to run it. But by
the time he's recommending a more
defensive strategy there, they don't
have the fuel or the assets to do that
either. Earlier in the war, here's his
take before all that bad stuff has
happened. It's too bad for the officers
and men of the submarine service that
they have not yet sunk any important men
of war, only merchant men. Well, his
disdain for the target would cost him.
And he noted later on when he's trying
to account for why the battle of Guad
Canal is going so badly for Japan. He
said, "The aimance of supply and
transport to the front has not even been
half fulfilled each time. It led those
on the verge of death, i.e. the army,
uh, to be extremely skeptical about the
navy and thinking that the navy is just
sacrificing the army." Well, no kidding.
That's what the army thought because for
an expeditionary force, you absolutely
need the navy to deliver you there to uh
maintain your supplies there. and
they're thinking the army's thinking you
navy are being irresponsible not doing
any of these things. Uh so there are
tremendous interervice rivalries between
the army and navy and Japan and it goes
back to the pre-war budget wars where
Japan's a resource poor country and both
services have what they consider
absolutely essential things to be
funded. Japan didn't have the money to
fund both and then when you get in war
and you start expending these things you
need even more money. And so the the
disagreements were brutal. Uh but before
I get there, uh the ingroup outgroup
uh differences that stovepipe things and
cause problems aren't simply between
army and navy. They're within each
service. So I'm going to start there and
be to be fair, I'm going to provide one
example for each service. I'll start
with the army. It was the Guandong army
or Japan's army in Manuria that decided
to invade all of Manuria back in 31. It
was not the home office back in Tokyo,
but it's this branch that turns out
kicks off a 15-year war. So, these folks
think that they know what's best for
Japan and how best to defend the empire,
and they're just off and running.
Meanwhile, there are a series of coup
attempts, some of them where navy is
part of it, a lot more of them with the
army that's dealing with it, uh going
back and forth. And at the very end when
Emperor Hirohito is capitulating there
was one last coup attempt which amen it
failed because the war might have
terminated quite the way it did if it
had had succeeded. So the point is if
you got coups running on that that is
not called unified command. It's a mess
and the Navy wasn't any better. I have a
different sort of example here. During
the war, the US um air ser the people
who are flying planes, they would
alternate combat and training missions
so that you would bring back someone who
had survived and learned something from
combat to tell new people the things to
avoid, how not to get yourself killed,
and some other things. Well, in Japan,
inroups, out groupoups, you sign up
together, you train together, you fight
together, and you die together. It
doesn't mean the Japanese couldn't have
grafted people between groups. It's just
culturally it's not the natural thing
that comes to mind. Moreover, the and
this apparently applies to the present
that uh in the US military they have
what are called hot washes after
different operations where you come back
and you're very self-critical about all
the things that went wrong to figure out
how to do it better the next time. Well,
there are cultural reasons why you would
not want to do that in Japan. just it's
different. So if these uh in-group
outgroup things are causing problems
within services, it gets toxic between
the services. And I've got four examples
and I'm going to start with
organizational issues. So it's only in
1944 that the army and navy finally to
get it together to have regular liaison
meetings in Tokyo. Great. Just in time
to uh you know figure out how how the
capitulation's going to work.
And then the army wanted to unify the
the two high commands. The Navy wanted
nothing to do with that one because they
knew they'd just become the box launch
delivery service for the army. Didn't
want to do that. So by 1945 they did
unify their information department.
Great. They can spew the same propaganda
and maybe share Tokyo Rose on a good
day. Who knows? But there was no
planning even under the imminent threat
of invasion to how they're going to
coordinate their assets to protect the
home island. They aren't even
coordinating their air assets.
Disaster.
And this disaster goes back way in time.
They had a very uh far back in time.
They'd had a very successful war against
Russia that ends in 1905. But afterwards
in 1906, immediately afterwards, the
army and navy are allowed to have
completely separate war plans. The army
plan is all about fighting Russia for
the big land grab in Eurasia. The navy
plan has completely different set of
enemies. It' be the United States and
Britain for the big gambit. You're not
going to use ships in Siberia. The big
gambit for empire in the Pacific. And
each of these plans, a they're secret
from the other service, and b each plan
assumes the other surface service is
going to do all kinds of important
things for them.
Okay, great. So, um I guess the idea of
secrecy and surprise, normally you apply
that to your enemies, not your sister
service, but that's how it works, uh in
this setup. Now, the army does come
around to the Navy plan. Why? because
they get walloped by the Russians on the
Mongolian border at the battle of
Nomanhan. The the br the Russians just
decimate them in 1939. So now the army
says, "Okay, okay, maybe that southern
advance thing wasn't such a bad idea."
And um so the Navy thinks this is great
and they do their uh southern advance.
They go zooming down. The Japanese mind
over matter stuff seems to be going
really well because in 1942 the army
takes more land than or or more
dispersed theater than any country on
the planet. The Navy hasn't uh lost a
single ship. I mean it's looking really
good. Uh except there are a few little
details here that are a problem. Um what
the Navy hadn't told the army is that
actually they weren't ready for this
whole thing. that they needed this outer
perimeter reinforced by airfields in
order to make the thing work. And that
wasn't complete. And the army learned
about this on August 17th, 1942 because
one of these airfields was being built
in this tropical nightmare called Guad
Canal that the United States knew about
even though the army didn't. And all of
a sudden, the Navy is in deep dark
trouble and needs the army to help them
out of Guad Canal. So now think samurai.
The Japanese 17th Army had been ordered
to take Port Moresby and New Guinea.
That's what they were up to. But with
Guad Canal, they are told, "Ah, you need
to tack on Guad Canal to that Port
Moresby event." Okay. And in logistics,
they're a thousand kilometers apart. So
now the Army uh is going to be lying to
the Navy about how many people they've
got at Guad Canal because they're scared
that the Navy won't provide enough
rations and things. The the Navy doesn't
provide enough rations. People starve
anyway. And then the navy that got the
army into this mess wants to call it off
and move out, but the army good samuris
want to fight on and uh they just expend
all kinds of resources. And this thing
has enormous strategic effects.
Prior to Guad Canal, the Japanese army
wanted to continue their strategy of
chasing the the nationalists out of
China. Back in 1937, the Japanese had
conquered Nanjing, which is the original
nationalist capital. And the
nationalists had fled up the Yangza
River to Chongqing beyond some gorges
and some other things and beyond the the
rail network. And in 1943, the Japanese
were planning to attack Chongqing. And
then at that point, I think if you're a
nationalist, you're fleeing into Burma.
And if that had happened, then you're
the Japanese could have probably pulled
hundreds of thousands of people out of
the China theater and put them
elsewhere. and that would have caused
all kinds of problems. Also, the
Japanese had to call off their plans to
uh invade Australia. So, Guad Canal has
enormous strategic implications. So, if
you're focusing samurai on one battle,
Guad Canal, well, it has implications in
places called China and Australia that
are a long way off. Okay. The United
States also had interervice rivalries,
right, between our army and navy. And
that's why you have two separate
campaigns for Admiral Nimttz and General
MacArthur. Big egos, one campaign for
each ego. And apparently that wasn't
even big enough for MacArthur. Okay. Uh
but even so, I don't believe the inner
service rivalries in the the United
States were remotely on the scale that
they were in Japan. I have one final
example to prove that one. So
after Pearl Harbor
uh that had been tremendously successful
for Admiral Yamamoto, he wanted to do
the next thing was to attack Midway
because US basing there. And the army
said, "I don't want we're not going to
do this." And Yamamoto goes, "I'm going
to resign." And the army, "We don't
care. I'll commit suicide. We'll buy
popcorn." Uh
and here's what changes this. So after
Pearl Harbor, Americans wanted to let
the Japanese know that we were thinking
about them. And so this is where
Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle, the
Doolittle raids named after him. In
April 1942, it was a one-way trip off an
aircraft carrier because they had so
much fuel in order to get to Japan that
the idea was they're going to go bomb
Japan and then ditch in China whoever
survives. Very brave people who did
this. And are they going to cause
massive damage in Japan? Well, yeah, if
you're directly underneath, you won't
appreciate it. But in general, it causes
minor damage, but it has a major un
anticipated strategic benefit. Think
samurai. Uh the army all of a sudden is
backing the navy that they're going to
now do midway with them. And it's right.
Don't think retaliate, avenge your
honor. The army was appalled that anyone
had been able to bomb Japanese skies. So
now they're all over it. Okay, so how
does Midway work out? Really poorly for
the Japanese. They lose four aircraft
carriers. Uh they've only got 12.
They've lost a third. Oops. And here we
go. In-group, outgroup. The Navy doesn't
tell anyone for three or four months.
Incredible. In a war, right? So they're
thinking about their little stove pipe
and they're ignoring Japanese interests
when this is going on.
Okay, different story. So they do get
their operational end to the whole
thing. Uh it's called um I mean this is
the firebombing of Tokyo. The whole
place went up in flames. In fact, it got
so hot the canals boiled. It's an
operational solution. And it's uh
unconditional surrender after a
protracted war of annihilation that
destroys just about every single
Japanese city minus a couple that
survived. Uh
what what broke the stalemate? And
here's what happened. It's a it's three
really bad things that happened in four
days. Talk about a concentration of
really bad events from a Japanese point
of view happening all at once. When you
want to talk about this is the
psychological shattering that actually
happens to the Japanese. First, the
United States drops an atomic bomb on
Hiroshima. Two days later, the J the
Russians pour 1.5 million people into
Manuria, the nightmare scenario of the
Japanese army. And they know if this war
protracts, the Russians are going to
come down through Manuria, down the
Korean Peninsula, onto Hkaido, and down
the home islands. It'll yield a divided
Japan if it goes on for a long time. And
then you have the next day, the United
States drops the second atomic bomb with
a bluff. The idea being we're going to
keep doing this daily or every other day
except we don't have any more atomic
bombs and we cannot build them quickly
for a long time. So that's big bluff.
But the emperor then has had enough and
he breaks the deadlock in the cabinet
and the cabinet allows the deadlock to
be broken the next day and then he makes
an unprecedented ra
had had that happened before to his
subjects telling them game over. And
then the next day he sends uh three
imperial princes to the manurian Chinese
and southern theaters conveying his
orders that game over. And from that
moment on, his samurai obeyed him and
they absolutely cooperated with the
occupation. There's no insurgency, no
nothing going on after this. And at the
end of the war, the United States um
came to understand the Japanese at the
beginning uh totally misread the
situation with the emb oil embargo
that's meant to deter and state it
precipitates the war that we didn't
want. But at the end of the war, the
United States realizes you're going to
need some level of Japanese cooperation
if you're going to occupy the place. And
they're going to use Emperor Hirohido
for this. Hirohito is scared to death
that it's not so much that he'll be
hanged, but that the United States will
extinguish his dynasty, kill him and his
son, and then that it's over. And so
he's willing to sign any piece of paper
that MacArthur puts under his pen. And
one of those is the Constitution of
Japan. that it's going to change their
civil and military institutions,
demilitarize the place and try to get a
democracy going there. It's uh the
constitution was written in one week by
MacArthur's staff. They're running
around raiding um bombed out libraries
for examples of western constitutions
and they cobble this thing together. And
this is the unded constitution of Japan
still in in power as in effect to this
very day. MacArthur's gift to Japan. All
right. I've been incredibly uh critical
of the Japanese, but to sum up here,
there are cultural explan explanations
for their neglect of grand strategy,
inability to cut their losses, inability
to coordinate, and the ferocity with
which they fought. So, if you look at
their values and they're explanatory of
what may well happen when things get set
off, but I've been really critical of
Japan. I want to even out the story by
ending on the United States a little
bit. Because the United States played a
good game or bad game of halfcourt
tennis and mirror imaged at the
beginning of this war. So when the
Japanese go into Manuria in 1931, we
want them out. We don't ask, well, why
are you doing this? And their answer
would be, well, hey, you passed the
Holly Smoot tariff.
That means uh this we're trade
dependent. Whom are we going to trade
with? And once you did the tariff,
everyone retaliated. So you've now shut
down international trade. So we need an
empire that's big enough to survive. So
that's why we're in Manuria. And by the
way, there are way too many communists
here. We got to get rid of those. And
then in 1937 when they up uh the ante
going into the rest of China, we didn't
inquire what's going on. And the from
the what the Japanese want to do is wall
off communism. Don't want that. And then
they want to stabilize China so that you
can have some productive economic
growth. And if you go, well, what were
US post-war objectives for China? Oo,
sounds remarkably familiar. Communists
outstabilize the place. Okay. Well, how
does the the war affect all this? Well,
actually, the the warfare that went on
wiped out the two barriers to communist
expansion in Asia. What what are the
barriers? Well, one, it's Shankai and
the nationalists in China. the Japanese
wipe him out. Uh they don't totally
defeat him, but they have so weakened
him and so discredited him, but by the
end of the World War II, he is really
poorly positioned to win the Chinese
Civil War, which he promptly loses. And
then what does the United States do?
What's the other barrier to communism?
Well, it's the Japanese. We wipe them
out. So what do you get? A unified
communist China, which makes really
complicated wars in the Korean War and
the Vietnam War. And the problem is a
gift that keeps on giving. We're still
dealing with this problem today.
So, take a little word from Sunza. Uh,
know your enemy or the other side. Know
the the person you're talking to. Uh,
don't play halfcourt tennis. It's a
really dangerous game. Rather, try to
analyze why. Ask yourself why is someone
doing whatever they're doing. And just
because you're trying to understand it
doesn't mean you're condoning it. It's
just trying to figure out the logic of
the other person. It'll set you up for
more informed choices. Before we move on
to the interview, a quick word from our
sponsors, Scale AI. The AI race is the
Manhattan Project for the modern age.
Whoever wins reshapes the balance of
global power. That's why Scale partners
with the US government to fuel America's
AI advantage through their data foundry.
The Air Force, Army, Defense Innovation
Unit, and Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Office all trust Scale to
equip their teams with AI ready data and
the technology to build powerful
applications. Scale recently introduced
Defense Llama. Scale's latest solution
available for military personnel. With
the Defense Lama, military personnel can
harness the power of AI to plan military
or intelligence operations and
understand adversary vulnerabilities.
Whether through its work with the
government or businesses like OpenAI,
Google DeepMind or Meta, scale is at the
forefront of US AI innovation. If you're
interested in learning more about how
scale powers frontier AI capabilities,
go to scale.com/baresh.
All right, back to Sarah. I'm a little
bit confused on some of the bushidto
stuff and how it explains Japan's
actions in the war. So look, this Zen
Buddhism stuff, the the the cherry
orchards that are blossoming and you
must act with the generosity of a
samurai, all this bushida moral stuff.
How does that square with the conduct of
Japan during the war, the rape of Nank
King, the killing of millions of
Chinese, the uh treatment of prisoners
of war, which rivaled the fatality rates
of the Nazi extermination camps? It
seems like there's a where's the
Buddhism there? Where's the book? Well,
a I'm not an expert on Buddhism,
but see, you've got a lot of things
conflated in there. Uh, if you're asking
about
um the part of the brutality of the war
is Japan's totally out of resources and
you're thinking it's going through a
massive area of t uh territory.
They actually had no ability to take PS
or if they took PS they'd have to halt
the military operation and then you got
to put these people somewhere and so
they just slaughtered them instead and
not there were PS and or or there were
cases of uh hostile civilians who also
got slaughtered because I I don't know
the because but uh they had very limit
limited numbers of people to deal with
this. So on the one hand, you've got
absolute desperation. I don't think any
people behave well when they're
desperate. The war had been going on for
years by the time we get interested in
it, right? It starts in 31. So you have
desperate people. Uh there's another
piece I can just add little pieces. I
can't explain a whole people that in the
prison camps. So in Japan,
if I'm going to be, let's say you were
Japanese, you and I are looking each
other in the eye. That's how you do it
in the West. Show that you're paying
attention. That's not how you do it in
Japan. In Japan, if you're Japanese, I'm
looking at your shoulder. It's rude to
look people in the eye. It's just too
intrusive. You're getting too much
information probably from that person's
face. So you can imagine a western in a
p prison camp looks his guard in the eye
and the eyes going the the guard's going
well who is this arrogant person you're
a p you can imagine bad things are then
going to be happening these are guesses
on what's going on of there are certain
values that I've talked about there's
certain desperation that's going on and
then there's uh the dehumanization of
what wartime's all about right initially
conscripts go in of all armies uh having
trouble killing people and then they get
better at it over time. This is a
tragedy of human beings. I don't know if
I answered your question. I don't know
that I know the answer. Okay, so here
here's another thing that I want to
clarify. Look, if you were trying to
understand Britain's conduct in World
War I, why they initiated it and why
they conducted in the way they did, and
you tried to understand it using
cultural explanations, what some British
guy wrote in the 17th century, I don't
know how far you'd get. And maybe the
more illuminating thing is just to look
at like immediately what was happening
in the 1910s, what were the proximal
strategic objectives. So with Bushido,
why why are we looking back at what
people were writing in the 1700s? I'm
going to break up the British thing into
two parts. So one p one analytical
framework is you can look at wars
uh in terms of underlying causes and
proximate causes. The underlying causes
are like the tinder of grievances on
both sides. And there can be cultural
components to that or other components.
And so there's this accumulating tinder
of where you've got two different sides
at least across purposes. But then
there's the match, the proximate cause,
which is a whole series of matches. And
finally, the last one's Pearl Harbor,
and you are off and running to a place
you might not want to go to. Right? So,
there's that. And then there's um
culture. Let's look at Britain strategic
culture. And I'm no expert on British
strategic culture, but these are some
basics. So, they're an island and they
want to be able to trade with the world,
but they don't want any one power.
dominating the continent. So this is
their strategic thinking from way back.
And so if there is a power that's on the
verge of dominating the continent, you
want to back the other side to prevent
that outcome. So that's very much a part
of British thinking goes back a long
time and you can read uh things going
back a long time of describing that
situation. There's another piece that
goes back a long time in the British. Uh
navies are rarely decisive in warfare.
What do I mean by decisive means you
actually uh get the goal that you're
after for fighting whereas armies can be
if your goal is I want to occupy all of
France or better yet the h the Holland
something smaller um yeah an army can
probably might be able to do that for
you one instrument of national power but
Britain's reliant on a navy and doesn't
like to have a big standing army and so
they're thinking in terms of diplomacy
and allies uh and working economics
making money from trade And so they are
the ones who coined the term grand
strategy. It is their gift to us and it
absolutely informs their uh thinking at
a very macro level. So no one thing is
entirely explanatory. Also we human
beings game the system. The moment I
tell you you're Japanese and you think
this way is the moment go oh that's what
she thinks. Haha. We're going to do
something different. Right? So this is
the problem with human beings. Hm. The
um the loyalty precept uh
wasn't one of the problems with the
Japanese military that they weren't
loyal that they were trying to do these
coups all the time and the young
officers were insubordinate. Yeah, it's
an excellent question and what you're
doing is feeding me back the Greek
principle of logic which is the law of
non-contradiction. You cannot
simultaneously believe mutually
exclusive things. So what's going on?
You're telling me it's all hierarchical
and now you're telling me junior
officers are doing or mid-level officers
are doing things. What's going on here?
Ah, but that's a fundamental principle
of logic that the west puts great
credence on. Not the case in the east
necessarily. Now, now people have
educations that are different. So we're
going back in the day where people are
not looking in terms of okay we got to
have a a logically consistent argument
rather uh there are these social values
that we are going to if if it's all
about group loyalties that's what we're
going to prioritize and if my subgroup
is going to be my unit or whatever
that's how that's going to go. So you're
you're doing a wonderful piece of
western logic. It's excellent. And this
is why uh other cultures find dealing
with westerners like battery acid
because they have these w these
different belief systems and you go like
okay you have women and we got women. Uh
our women drive cars and yours are like
where uh is there something wrong with
your women? It it's it's battery acid on
other cultures. I I was struck when you
were describing you know the Nazis were
putting their en enemies on death
ground. the Japanese were putting their
enemies on death ground and in both
cases it was detrimental because you
were preventing the other side from
surrendering. That seems even worse than
what was happening before that period in
history where look, you can think over
time that our norms about civility and
war um uh war crimes are improving over
time. But it seems like in World War II,
the way people were acting was even
worse than they were acting in World War
I. The way like Germany and Russia were
fighting in World War I was probably
more civil than how they were fighting
in World War II. What? And then
obviously the what Japan was doing in
China at the time. What was going on
around the world that people just got so
like demonic during this period? No,
it's not warfare is not civil. You're
killing people. A lot of people talk
about just wars and it's rather a hu
horrible piece of human existence. So
there a number of things have gone on
with the industrial revolution. You can
now kill people on an industrial scale.
when you're doing it with bows and
arrows, it takes a lot more time to
create the mayhem. So, that's one thing,
the ability just to wipe out people.
World War I on the Western Front was all
entrenched. On the Eastern front, there
was a great deal of movement, but on the
Western Front, it was entrenched, which
meant civilian populations weren't
really touched by it. Right? Where the
initial fighting, yeah, they're leveled,
but once you get a trench, you're not.
And then we in the west don't actually
study too much what happened to the
civilians on the eastern front where
it's moving around. This is back to my h
halfcourt tennis. So we're not paying
attention to those civilians. So for the
west very few civilian casualties
whereas when you get to World War II
you're bombing people. You know
technologies you can get at people and
uh invading. Also it's the lesson of
World War I. the feeling that um the
Germans really hadn't felt their defeat
and that allowed them to make up this
story about how it was they weren't
defeated. the Jews did it or whoever
they were betrayed and u Churchill and
Roosevelt decided there would be a a
march to Ber Berlin to disabuse them of
that and then Vos killing a lot of
civilians to get to Berlin and of course
the Russians were determined to pay back
for what the the Nazis had done to them
and we had no sympathy for uh what we
weren't going we're going to turn a
blind eye what the Russians were up to
because the Nazis had been so heinous.
This is probably wrong. I want you to
correct me, but maybe one way you can
explain why the Japanese were so brutal
in their campaign around this time is if
you if you think that when you lose, you
have this idea that you have social
death. It's better to kill yourself than
go back to your family and say, "I
surrendered." Maybe they just applied
this is their failure to empathize with
or think it from the perspective of
their enemy. But they were just thinking
like, "Listen, if we lost, we would
commit sepoku. when they lose they
forfeit human rights and in some sense
like it was just like applying the
principle of social death to their
enemy. The whole war is brutal. So um we
they're doing a lot of hand-to-hand
brutality and part of it has to do with
lack of equipment. Uh that firebombing
of Tokyo happened in one night. I think
it's 80,000 Japanese are incinerated.
Okay, let's talk about brutality.
Now, the reason why Americans did that
is because they knew the alternative was
ascending American kids onto Japan who
would die doing that. And so, the
decision was it was better to kill a lot
of Japanese civilians than it was to
kill American soldiers. And that's also
the reason that went into the atomic
bombing. That's controversial, right?
The Americans, why why did they drop
atomic bombs on the Japanese? And it's
that there was no um disagreement about
that in the United States at the time
because it was a question of are you
going to send
American young men your age and uh
millions of them would have died hitting
the home islands or are you going to do
the the bombing and of course the
Americans did the bombing. So there's
brutality all around in this war. Wars
don't come up with clean hands. Was
there any way for the West to or for
America to win the Pacific War without
the firebombing? Well, okay, let's this
is a whole other topic. Win in wars.
What does win mean for us? It was put
Japan back in its box, right? But this
is a whole problem for Japan. What's
win? Or this country in Afghanistan?
What's when? Is it booting uh Osama bin
Laden out of Afghanistan? Once that
happens, it's a day. Is it overthrowing
the Taliban at a particular period or is
it trying to turn the whole place into a
democracy? Okay, those are all radically
different things, but you need to make
up your mind what it's going to be. I
think it's a miracle. Uh well, a Okay,
the win, if you're going to have the
win, be that the United States
transforms Japan into a functional
democracy
or sets them on the road so that they
will become them. If that's what the win
is. No, because if you don't I get I
showed you the three horrible events in
4 days. That's quite incredible to have
that much bad news happening in a half a
week. And that absolutely shattered the
Japanese. And it also opened the door
for those who thought they were in crazy
land to to um capitulate.
If you don't do that, okay, we invade
the home islands. Americans were sick of
the war and you start losing lots of
American kids in uh in Japan. Uh I think
at some stage you decide we decide to
pull them out of Japan and blockade them
eternally. And then you've got I don't
know Japan is like a a new North Korea
just this inevitable
uh these eternal non functioning
society. So, no uh these wars are tragic
and also don't think that you have all
the cards that you're going to make the
decisions about what's going to happen.
The other side's going to put you into
corners where you're going to choose
from very unpleasant alternatives.
I want to ask you about how the war
starts. So, there's obviously the go 10
years before and you've got the tariffs
and that creates the incentive to build
an empire. But even months before when
there's negotiations between Japan and
America to get rid of the embargo, it's
it's striking to me how much
miscommunication
and the ability for both sides to just
understand that there was a compromise
here was such a big factor here where uh
I I feel like if uh Prince Canoy and uh
uh FDR could get on like a Zoom call, I
feel like the war um you're an optimist.
you. But think about uh let's talk about
sunk costs. Uh and I'm going to talk
about sunk casualties. By the time
you're there, the Japanese have suffered
600,000 casualties in China.
Uh there is no easy out of that one. And
so the United States is minimum program
is you get out of China. Not happening
if you're Japanese. Uh there's you look
at the government, the government's
definitely on death ground with that one
because there's no way they stay in
power if they get out of China. Uh and
particularly this is why Hirohito is Mr.
Silent for most of the war. Initially
he's all for it until it goes sour and
then he's less so. Uh is he knows that
he'll be uh if not assassinated,
declared insane, and then his his uh
perfectly serviceable adolescent son or
however old his son was would be the
token emperor. So I I don't think no
matter the Zoom call is not going to
change the fundamentally
high stakes that are involved for both
sides. Oh you really think if Hirohito
had like stepped in and been like no
we're not doing this that they he would
have been you served as emperor. Yeah
early on. Oh and there's another piece.
Let's look at the United States in 1941.
Great uh great depression isolationist.
This is where the first America firsters
are. They're the ones who created the
idea. They didn't want to know about all
these foreign places. Uh the totally
isolationist. Hawaii wasn't even a
state. Doesn't become a state until
1959. If you're Japanese, you'll look at
a place. Oh, it's a colony. So, it'll be
like sort of the dog that barks. You
take a newspaper and flap him a few
times and maybe the dog will start
barking because what what the Japanese
want is the United States just mind his
own business. Stay out of Asia. It's our
backyard. It's not your backyard. And uh
looks at the United States. United
States doesn't have that much uh trade
with Asia compared to the rest of the
world. Sure, it sells Japan most of its
oil, but that's not most of US trade.
I was I was reading about this before
preparing to interview you and the
particular cases where diplomacy broke
down. So there's examples where the
translators between Japan and America
are and I can't believe this is true.
You can tell me if this is not, but
they're exaggerating what each side is
saying to make them more vivid to read.
Like, you know, if Tojo says something
consiliatory, it's exaggerated to make
it. And that's like obviously not the
role of a diplomatic translator. Um and
there's many cases where after the war
Tojo says if we had gotten the motives
with Vandy that FDR apparently was
contemplating sending to us if we saw
those agreements we would have agreed or
there apparently they were they
misunderstood that the final agreement
they got from Secretary of State Hull
where it said that you must return China
they thought it included Manuria Hull
didn't intend it to be included Manuria
they might have said yes to that. It
seems like the war really could have
been averted if like a couple of
mistransations were avoided. Uh, okay. I
wouldn't take Tojo as my source for
anything. Uh, he's a guy who, uh, uh, he
was before a graduating class of cadets
or something. He was talking about how
even mediocre people had said that he
was mediocre and but look where he'd
risen to be and he's this great man. Uh,
also at the end he's got this whiny
answer of, oh, it wasn't my fault. It's
all your translators and
uh, and oh, the piece on Manuria. No, I
don't know that that would have been a
compromise because the League of Nations
had sent in something called the Litton
Commission which had told the Japanese
they had to get out and oh by the way it
is a fiction that Manuria is not a part
of China. It is an integral part of
China has been for the longest time.
What the Japanese did is they kidnapped
the lastQing emperor Manchu Manchuria uh
whose ancestors came from Manuria.
Popped him in Henry Pui made him the
emperor to try to come up with this
fiction that oh Manuria is a separate
place. Uh excuse me it's not. It's part
of China. It's the internationally
recognized territory of China. So I
wonder if one of the problems here is
look uh it was not in the vital
strategic interest of America to secure
or liberate China. In fact the out the
outcome of the war obviously is a
national suit is the communistic power
and as we'll talk about in the next
lecture that was the very opposite of
liberating China. Um so basically
America puts in this oil embargo and
goes knows that the outcome of failed
negotiations on getting rid of that
embargo is a total world war of this
kind and it's not even for the main
strategic objective which is you know
you got to get Hitler you got to get
beat Germany what I mean wasn't this
just our failure grand strategy to
realize why are we doing this what's our
strategic objective on we weren't
fighting Germany the only reason we
fought Germany is because Hitler made a
major blunder
He had an alliance with Japan that said
if if Japan was attacked he would
come in. Not if Japan attacked someone
else that he would come in. He
interprets it broadly and he declares
war on this country. That is how the the
United States got into World War II uh
Europe. If Hillary had not made that
blunder, FDR would have been in a world
of trouble trying to explain why he's
suddenly going to be fighting Nazis over
an attack on Pearl Harbor by Japanese.
So that's a separate issue. The main
thing that um uh Americans who thought
deeply cared about is the international
system that we should deal with each
other through laws through freedom of
navigation. So this is how you run your
commercial transactions that big
countries don't get to overrun small
countries because if they do the entire
international system goes down. And the
logic that you're describing is
excellent logic. And this is what the
Japanese are saying. It's like why would
the Americans care about this? Uh
Americans care deeply about the
international system or uh people who
are thoughtful about it. And it's also
like why why not let the Russians eat
all of Eur uh of uh Ukraine? Why are the
Europeans suddenly all over this
problem? Right? And they've unified very
recently uh on on this. It's because the
whole system is at stake. Yeah. So it's
it's it is really high stakes at a
strategic level. The Japanese are
looking at the operational level and
going why do you care about these
countries? Uh we care about the entire
system because our prosperity is based
on it. So I wonder if the problem here
is that uh America isn't at least at the
time wasn't willing to give enough
concessions to the factions within Japan
in that care about peace so that they
can save face and actually argue for
ending war where just the idea that
they're going to give up Manuria as
well. Obviously that's not going to
happen. And when Secretary of State Hall
just sees these vacasillating uh
telegrams from the Japanese he assumes
that's because they're like they're
fickle or something. It's like no, it's
a civilian part of the government like
trying its best to prevent the military
from taking over and you got to get you
got to give them something to save face,
you know. Um the that faction had
already lost and they lost in 1936.
Um Takahashi Koreo is Japan's longest
serving finance minister and he was a
very distinguished man. In fact, he
brought the Japanese economy out of the
great depression before uh anyone in the
west was doing it through government
spending and trying to get people to
spend at home.
and he told the army, he said, "Fellas,
if you go on this bent for empire,
uh, you need, you're not going to
actually get resources because you're
going to spend a lot of money fighting
with people, resources doing that, and
then it's going to take you years of
investments to access these resources.
So, you got to be able to cover these
investments for years and years and
years." And he's saying, "Cooperate
within the international system. That is
the way to prosperity for Japan." Well,
uh, the that was the February young
officers revolt where he and I can't
remember how many others were murdered.
They came to his home in the middle of
the night and as he stood up to talk to
them, they literally hacked him apart.
They had lost that that that whole game
is over. But Prince doesn't like he
knows he's going to the person who's
prime minister in 1941 realizes that
they're going to lose a war against
America and he doesn't want to do that.
It's just that the Tojo, the war
minister at the time, doesn't answer to
him. Like there are people that the
prime minister is like doesn't want war
and we don't give him enough to save.
Wait, they have a huge army there that's
more than capable of assassinating
people and they get in the way. So it
it's that ship has sailed
that you can make this is what a pivotal
decision is. Once you've made it,
there's no going back to the way the
world was. and Japan lost too many
people and uh there are too many figures
and the army. It it's um we think that
it's an inevitable outcome of the of
having the world the way it is now with
this Japan this uh wonderful country now
uh
they just at the lead of so many
different level areas of human endeavor
and we think oh that's the that's the
inevitable outcome. It's not. Yeah. I
guess what I'm trying to ask you is is
it like is there anything America could
have done in the immediate years leading
up to the war that could have prevented
this outcome? Because the fact that
there is a world like
you should assume that if there is a
world war, things weren't done
optimally, right? Not that doesn't mean
everybody's equally at fault, but is
there anything that could have been
done? Holy smok but but like in the US
directly before but this is serious is
uh we all live that holy smooth tariff
is a game of halfcourt tennis you're
looking at the United States it's in a
terrible depression you want to protect
jobs here and so you raise these big
tariff walls and then okay what's the
other side in that going to do they're
going to raise their tariff walls and
pay you back what's that going to do
it's going to cost a lot of American
jobs if you play that game you need to
be talking with other people so uh once
You have set the conditions, hot house
conditions for fascists to take over in
Germany and in Japan. You are in a world
of hurt. That uh the easy solutions are
no longer there anymore. So maybe I'll
ask the question this way. The oil
embargo, was it a mistake? Because it's
the idea is to protect the international
system, prevent empire. Well, we got
more empire, we got a world war, we got
communist taking over in China. Whatever
is going to happen if we got rid of the
oil embargo can't have been worse than
that, right? Well, what yeah, it was
what Roosevelt was really scared of was
that the Japanese would attack Russia.
He was so because then he thought Russia
would fall and if Russia fell, he
thought the Nazis would win. So, at
least when the Japanese attacked, they
attacked us. That was actually better
than attacking Russia. So I the oil
embargo um
uh if you want to
I I So let's say you don't do it and
Japan never attacks us and then the uh
uh Russians are down and you've got um
Nazis in control of the world. So it
must be better. Doesn't seem but you
don't have the world war with America.
Like it doesn't seem insane to think
that. And we're still going to find the
Nazis. You're not going to have an
international system. Oh, and you've um
if that's the case and the Nazis were
gearing up because eventually they're
going to fight us because So, this is
another problem. Another um concept that
I think is useful is limited versus
unlimited objectives. A limited object
or an unlimited objective is I want to
do regime change on your country. The
most unlimited variety is that not only
do I want to do regime change, but I
want to kill all your people while I'm
at it. So um if that is what the your
opposite number is planning, if you
compromise with them, you are simply
setting them up and putting them in a
stronger position when they come at you
for the final kill. If they have limited
objectives, then by all means compromise
with them and negotiate away on what is
it. You want just this little sliver of
territory or you want some preferential
treatment, we can do that for you. But
um you're talking about a world order
here where it's going to be based on
laws increasingly or uh these opposing
spheres of influence to keep pushing
back on this the I don't have an answer
beyond you know I've given you what
little I can think of but I hey I'm not
the grand puppeteer in this world these
com these questions you're asking me are
way above my pay grade.
So, people in the YouTube comment
section get mad at me when I when I keep
asking about like counterfactuals. Um,
and I understand, you know, obviously I
don't understand what's happening at the
time. I'm naive about history, whatever.
But I do think it's important what what
are we trying to do when we try to
understand history? We're trying to
understand if we had done things
differently, what would have happened?
What are the lessons we take? And
counterfactuals are the main way we can
do that. Yeah. Yeah. I'm all for it. Um,
we teach by counterfactuals is replay it
and can you come up with different
options? I think you're in a series of
really awful options. Mhm. The
difference between the Japanese and the
Nazis is that the Nazis had the ideology
was that we got to kill millions of
people. It's like that is what they
believed. The Japanese didn't in the
same way have the ide and naturally they
had um their continental empire. They
also wanted trade. Uh and they you know
they they don't like communists. They
don't want the communists to take over
in China. It just seems like naturally
if we didn't go to war with them, we
might have been allies as we ended up
being later on. Well, they attacked us
and the oil embargo. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But but the question is like should we
got rid of the oil?
But wait a second. The Japanese are
saying we have the rights to your oil.
Excuse me. We have the right to sell it
or not sell it to anyone we feel like.
All right. It's I mean what since when
do they have the rights to it? Okay,
great. So you're going to do all this
crazy stuff and then still think we have
to sell you oil and oh by the way this
oil is being used to kill Chinese all
over the place. This is what the what
their Japanese bombers are running on.
Yeah. I feel like No, I mean morally I
agree. We don't like they don't own our
oil. The question is like it's not about
like are they entitled to it? It's like
should we have given it to them? Would
the outcome have been better if we did?
Um I'm telling you I suspect the outcome
wouldn't have been better. But I don't
know, right? And you're asking me things
where um my experience is I'm just a
professor. I just, you know, show up at
seminar on time and I try to do reading
and prep and my experience has not been
in government, let alone at the highest
echelons of government of what's
feasible and what's not feasible. And um
the answers I've given you are where I'm
at, but I don't I can't tell you more.
All right, I'll ask about other things,
too.
um the the um the sort of like
delusional optimism of the Japanese to
think that they could beat America. How
much of that is motivated by the idea
that they actually do think they're led
by a living deity? Like did that make or
is it just is that related to why they
thought they could win? No. I But but
you're looking at the United States is
isolationist. If you're Japanese and
you're looking at these absolutely
isolationist Americans, right, who are
letting Britain, their closest ally,
potentially go down to Nazis, right?
Because uh think about Britain. Uh it
been what how did it all work? Fall of f
fall of Norway, fall of France, then
they lost Cree. We aren't even in the
war. They're about losing everything and
we're not doing anything.
Uh,
so wait a second. Now I'm losing my
track of my my uh my train of thought.
Revisit the question again, please. Uh,
can somebody in the audience remember
the question?
Yeah. Oh, the optimism of the Japanese.
So, they're looking at it and going, the
United States is not bailing out its its
key ally. Hawaii is a a colony, right?
The it's a bunch of white people
dominating Hawaiians. So, we're just
going to do a little um uh set an
example that hey, if you mess with us,
it's going to get costly and we know you
don't have much trade in Asia. Sure, you
you we want to buy your oil oil, but
overall most trades elsewhere. And so,
they're looking at it isolationist,
well, won't the answer be the
isolationist go, woo, this is expensive.
Let's get out of here. And of course,
that's not understanding Americans. I
remember I was in seminar the day that
9/11 happened and the TV uh there was TV
in the seminar rooms and there was a
break and after the end of the break uh
the students had the TV on and we're
watching tower one had gone down and
then while we're in seminar the next
we're watching it goes down and I
thought oh my there's going to be hell
to pay for this one because this is how
Americans are that if you mess with us
boy does it get ugly and I boy This is
like don't think, retaliate. Uh so um
the Japanese didn't understand that part
of us. In fact, a lot of people don't.
They look at Americans, we look like a
bunch of hedonists. But if you mess with
us, it's ugly. If you are in the
Japanese government a couple years
before like 1939 or something, um it
sounds like from your earlier answer
that you think it was a sort of hopeless
situation if you're the finance minister
or if you're the prime minister to Is
there anything they could have done to
prevent an inevitable conflict with
America? They brought it up and they
say, "Well, uh we can't afford this. The
resources aren't here." And the the army
wasn't interested. And they shut up
because the last guy had been uh night
uh killed in his house in his pajamas.
So they weren't up for that. How much
stock do you put in the idea that um if
you have a society that rapidly
industrializes that goes from a feudal
state to advanced industrial nation in a
generation that it just not enough time
for the culture to evolve. Uh and so the
way that the Japanese behaved in the
leadup to the war and in during the war,
it just the feudal values just didn't
have a chance to uh evolve in the the
like the major restoration happened too
fast. Uh no, it didn't happen too fast.
But it's that institutions take a long
time to take root. Look at this country.
Uh it's been an evolving democracy for
hundreds of years. Okay, we no longer
have slavery. Amen. Uh but you look at
today really consequential things about
our own institutions. So now we're going
to go pick on the Japanese because they
managed in one generation to westernize
their political, judicial, legal,
educational, you you name it, they
westernized them. But it there wasn't
enough time for these things to grow
deep roots. And then if you think about
who's doing this, they're called the
Genroe. This very distinguished
generation of Japanese who all knew each
other. And so their uh career paths were
very broad covering both civil and
military areas. And when they died, they
couldn't transfer their prestige to
anyone else. Nor had they
institutionalized it in some kind of
cabinet or something that would force uh
all these different f groups to discuss
things without giving a primacy to the
military and then understand what is the
tradition in Japan shogun it that's what
Japan had before what's a shogun shogun
is a Japanese word for general so the
long history of Japan is military rule
so when it comes back in World War II
That in a way is a kind of normaly. It
would have taken a long time. So this
comes back to the United States and
fooling around with tariff walls
thinking that was such a clever idea.
Maybe if the great depression had been
managed better, it would have given time
for these institutions to take deeper
roots. No one knows. But I would not
criticize the Magi generation. They're
brilliant. They did so much. But it
you're talking just a number of years
and let's look at this country. We're uh
really having major problems with our
institutions wondering whether we've got
a stalemated legislature, whether we got
a skewed court system or whatever it is.
And we're sorting these things out and
then to criticize the Japanese because
they couldn't do it all in 25 years. M
the uh one thing I found really
interesting in your book is that uh you
were arguing that not only was the
military not in charge of the the
officers, but like the mil nobody was
even in charge of the military. There
was like no I think you called it a
system of irresponsibility that it was
like just basically government by
committee. Tell me more about that. Why
why why does that lead to mistakes?
Well, I'm gonna flip around and and look
at uh how the West has done it. It's
it's all about it's it's supposed to be
and of course there are exceptions that
it's not that it's about you if you have
a particular job. that your job gives
you certain authority by law to do
things and then we have courts to
adjudicate when you in that position
other people think that you've exceeded
your authority and they start suing
about different things and that's how it
goes in the west it's very legalistic
goes all the way back to the Romans this
is uh when I think about what is the
west it's Greek logic it's Roman law and
then it's these uh Jud Judeo-Christian
moral values that those are essential
pillars of what the west is all about.
So in Japan it's yeah they get laws and
they westernize but they have their own
indigenous way of dealing with things
and it's very much about different
inroups and outroups handling things in
whatever the committee is. And so we're
going well well who actually did that
and whose fault is it? because we have
this very legalistic way and fault enjoy
and law we're going to either put you in
jail or whatever. So it's just it's
different ways of of organizing
ourselves but we in the west assume
because going back to Roman times is
that institutions are going to be a
really big thing that that's how things
are going to work. So then when we get
into somewhere like Iraq and we think
the police is going to still uh be
functioning after we blow the
government, it's like whoa whoa whoa
whoa. It's not an institutionalized
it's not instit I don't know I'm no
expert but you're projecting the kind of
institutional set setup that western
countries typically have to other
people. They may name these things the
same thing police or whatever but they
may function in very different ways.
When you look at the soldiers who fought
these hopeless battles uh where tens of
thousands of them on a single island
might starve or be forced into a bonsai
charge that they knew was hopeless and
they were all going to die and they knew
that they were put in this hopeless
situation because of these destructive
petty fights between the navy and the
army where one of them isn't willing to
supply the other one. Why didn't there
that break their morale where it's just
like look we're we're supposed to die
and commit sepoku because you guys
didn't give us the right supplies
because you guys aren't willing to share
information or something. A I don't know
the answer because I'm not a social
historian where you would really be
doing a I've always I've done more
diplomatic and military so you're
looking top down but what you're asking
is very important question for for how
do individuals react to all this and
that I do not know the the answer and
you'd have to and there's another piece
that makes it hard in Japan since people
don't want to talk about failure because
it's considered um a loss of face
whereas in the west one of the
fundamental uh assumptions of
Christianity is we're all sinners,
right? Original sin. We're we're we're
all we're all defective goods from the
very beginning. And so there isn't this
this expectation for perfection because
it's known you're kind of a mess to
begin with. And so you can talk about
these things. So that's a whole other
problem of getting people to open up
about
truly horrible events. So I don't know
the answer. I know that the World War II
generation, they came home, they just
didn't talk about it with their
children. And uh it just not not a
matter for discussion. So I can't answer
that of why they uh follow. But you look
in the West um in World War I, soldiers
would go up and over the trenches and
they knew exactly what was going to
happen to them. And yeah, there were
people who didn't and then they were
court marshaled and shot. A lot of
people were shot in World War I, but
there's been a change in society about
what young men are willing to do for
when their officers start telling them.
The way the Russians solve this problem
in uh Ukraine, but Stalin would do this
too. You send people up ahead and then
you've got the KGB or whatever the
killer unit. So anyone who tries to go
the wrong way in the battlefield, they
get machine gunned by their own side.
That's one way to get an army to go
forward and that's what Putin is doing
right now. And uh but anyway, it's uh in
more democratic places, people aren't
willing to go along with this now. But
in the west, we did it too. Um when
you're having lunch with your colleagues
with the people who are also experts in
this field and you're discussing look
what what what are still the big
unresolved questions? We don't
understand why this person did X or why
events transpired in a certain way. What
are like the big things where you guys
have to hassle it out? Oh, well, it's
more more someone's decided what the
curriculum's going to be. And oh, um,
and then you teach it. Oh, and by the
way, as of like six months ago, I've
moved to the Maritime History Center, so
I'm no longer teaching. So, uh, I'm just
doing research at this stage. Uh well I
think the the whole point of the
curriculum at the war college is to get
people out of the operational level. So
the junior course is about the strategic
effects of operation. It's like okay uh
Pearl Harbor oper it's a to me it's an
example I'll use is Pearl Harbor. It's
an A+ military operation. They sink
everything. Of course it's shallow water
and we raise most of it afterwards. They
lose nothing. I mean, boy, how can you
do a a more perfectly choreographed
uh military operation than that one,
except it turns an absolutely
isolationist country into one hellbent
coming after Japan and that would be
called a strategic disaster. So, you got
to be cautious about your military
actions and think about what are the
strategic consequences and it's very
difficult to gauge those accurately. So,
that's one big issue that you need to
get at. And then for the seniors, it's
okay, great, you're an officer and you
understand, if you're in the army, you
understand how to use armies in the navy
about how to use navies, but how does
this integrate with all the other
instruments of national power that
actually uh account for how wars turn
out and economics is a huge one and the
you'll never there is no definitive
answer in these wars, but rather you can
give uh analytical concepts and this is
my reason for doing these lectures is to
say, "Hey, don't play half court
tennis." Wouldn't that be a basic thing?
Is it going to provide you the answers
if you look at the other side? No, it
won't, but it'll position you to be in a
better shape. Or tossing out limited
versus unlimited wars and unlimited wars
are putting people on death ground. Uh,
does that answer the question? No. But
he goes, "Okay, if Vladimir Putin has an
unlimited objective visav uh the world
order," and he's basically said that he
does,
uh then compromising with him would be a
mistake on that subject, right? And
you're going to have to deal with him
one way or another. So, it's uh the uh
what is it? History isn't over. the uh
great the long-standing struggle between
continental powers that want to divide
the world up into mutually exclusive
spheres of influence and butcher each
other over territory. very negative some
they tend to be very authoritarian or
this maritime order says hey surely join
the party follow the rules you'll make
money right and this is Angela Merkel is
thinking this of hey we're going to she
was a German chancellor for many years
and she's thinking Putin we'll sell him
lot oil he'll make money it's a win-win
surely well he's back to his continental
stuff destroying wealth and lives that's
what the alternate world order looks
like is killing people to get things.
It's more promising to spread the other
one. It's been and this disagreement has
gone been going on for a long long time.
I I feel like we had a mini version of
this debate in the podcast we did a year
ago. I have a limited number of ideas.
The um if you just said, you know, we
can't compromise with people who will
have these unlimited goals like Putin
who have these territorial goals. If
we're using the analogy as you're
explicitly making it to Japan during
World War II, look, what it took, if we
wanted to say we're not going to
compromise with your territorial goals,
we will stop you at every way. What it
took was a world war that led to an
unconditional surrender. So, if we're
using that analogy, does that imply that
no compromise requires some
unconditional surrender type event? No,
no, no. Um, isn't this the death ground
thing? No. There's something called
precision nuclear strike. uh
um and it has changed uh things. During
World War II, the United States had
sanctuary, which means other people
couldn't touch us at home and our
productive base was not touched and that
was essential. There are many things
that were essential for allied victory.
Take any one of them away and the
outcome's different. One of the
essential things is this productive
base. Uh this this time around all kinds
of people can come get the United
States. So uh a lot of times in foreign
affairs you can't solve things and I
don't know who originally said this but
you manage things and so uh this is
where the uh sanctions and things come
in of you give people a timeout from the
world order you don't solve it you look
at North Korea that is not solved by a
long shot but at least South Korea can
go become prosperous and the north is
just sitting with its timeout and being
more and malign at home but it's it's
more like that it's uh of not
recognizing
for instance conquests and this is what
went on actually when Stalin took over
the Baltic states we never recognized
that in fact they run they ran
governments in exile based on the funds
that their I think oh yeah there was
there were Baltic states had their funds
in US banks so when Stalin overran them
I think those funds became what funded
their embassies and so uh n generations
later uh we recognize their
independence. You can't uh these things
are not solved on anyone's watch and
basically if you want uh the things the
way the last cold war ended is cuz the
Chinese and Russians changed their
minds. You have to wait for others to
come to their own decisions. What is the
track record of sanctions actually
changing other people's mind? Because if
you look at the world today, unknown but
just to finish the but because you're
advocating that as a as the way we
should proceed this. So it's worth
asking. If we look at the world today,
North Korea, we've sanctioned them for
decades. The if the idea is we're going
to deprive them of resources to do these
bad things. Well, they're just going to
divert resources from their civilians to
the military and you're just making the
people poor. You're not changing the
government's decision. Same thing in
Iran. Same thing in Venezuela. So, what
are we? We're just like making the
people poor. We're not even changing the
government's decision. What's the idea
here? Um, it's a, you know, I don't know
the answer. And I'm working on an edited
book with a wonderful colleague who
knows much more about economics than I
do and we have all kinds of chapters.
This book will not be a good read, but
no. Well, because you want to learn
things and so I've done a lot of edited
books to learn things. uh one on
different kinds of naval operations and
then they feed into the the books that
are more overarching. But this one's on
sanctions and we're in the process of
writing the concluding chapter now and
the things that you're bringing up. I
don't uh I I have sanctions don't seem
to make people do what you want them to
do and so a lot of people go well they
don't work but boy do they inflict pain.
And then of course you're doing it on a
usually an authoritarian regime that
diverts as much of that pain as possible
into the civilian population and then
uses that as an excuse to justify its
rather brutal rule and I don't have the
answer and the other piece is so you're
dealing with these uh expansionist
powers with a limited toolkit and the
question is which tool to use and I
truly don't have the answer but what
you've you've mentioned a really good
counter argument and I've given you an
argument and I don't know which the of
the rebuttal is the better one honestly
and I think the whole uh approach this
is another thing about what do you uh
you were asking what you're worried
about but here's something to help you
with what you're worried about is
thinking in terms of arguments
counterarguments and rebuttal so you
have an you have an argument I have an
argument and on this one I'm not sure
what the rebuttal is and but it's a good
way of thinking about things because it
allows you to change your mind. You may
well be right or I may be right or maybe
we're right in one country but another
one. I and I I honestly don't know the
answer. Yeah, it does seem like one of
the biggest things you want to try to
figure out in strategy in general
because if you try to do sanctions, it
doesn't seem to work that well. Well, if
you try to replace a regime, I mean,
people said like look Saddam's regime
after his invasion in Kuwait. This is
somebody who has territorial goals. So
we can't have somebody who's going to
keep trying to do this in power. You try
to replace that. That doesn't work.
Well, that worked well. Yeah. Right.
Yeah. So, just like the idea, what do
you do with the rasible regimes? Well,
that that seemed like a big open
question. Um, in the Gulf War, Bush
Senior fought a limited war for a
limited objective. Their limited
objective was get Iraqi troops out of
Kuwait, restore the Kuwaiti government.
Those are the two really big things. and
then call it a day when you've done
those things.
That's what he did and it was an
incredibly successful war and it went to
our heads. So, right because when you're
have run a successful limited war, it's
over and it's over very rapidly. You get
stuff with not too much cost and it's
done. So, then we try to do the total
makeover of another country and excuse
me, what right does one country have to
do a total makeover on another country?
And then of course the Russians and
Chinese are apoplelectic watching us do
this and that's a problem. Or you think
about Afghanistan. Maybe you go in there
and uh you at least boot uh Osama bin
Laden out of the country and then
proclaim it victory and leave. All
right. Going back to Japan. Yeah. Okay.
I tried to divert you. No. No. I I I did
the diverting. It was interesting. Um do
we have some sense of what Japanese
public opinion was like through the 30s
and 40s? I don't know. And it's also
because it's becoming more and more um
authoritarian
and yeah, I have no idea on that
subject. And again, it's a social
historian that would require really
detailed knowledge that I don't have. I
had Daniel Jorgen who wrote the prize
which is the Pulitzer Prize winning
history of oil and he has a big section
in the book about World War II because
in his view oil was a big component of
why the war happened the way it did. And
one of the interesting points he made
was that he thinks that the kamicazi
missions a big part of the motivation
behind them was that Japan lacked the
fuel to have the pilots fly back. Is
that accurate? Oh, it's worse than that.
uh they don't have the the the fuel to
actually train the pilots. And as we
learned in 911, sorry to bring it back,
it's really much easier to learn how to
take off a plane and crash it into
something, right? That's what those guys
were doing than it is to teach them how
to make safe landings under weird
conditions. So, um the kamicazi was just
an act of it's a guided missile and it
was an act of having very few assets at
the end of the war and not enough fuel
to fly anyone anywhere. So, it's going
to be a guided missile into uh an
aircraft carrier or a battleship
destroyer or something. One of the
things I learned from your book is the
overwhelming fraction of debts on the
Japanese side during the war happened
after it was known that they were going
to lose. Um I think in the last 14
months and this is offering a book at
1.8 million of the total 2.1 million
Japanese debts. That's 85% of the total
happened in the last 14 months of the
war. And a similar thing is true with
Germany whereif I think 43% of the debts
happened in the last year of the war. Um
I think like 2.3 million out of the 5.3
million. Walk me through what is going
on inside government when the higher
level people must know that they're
losing but they're going to make bigger
and bigger sacrifices. Well, you're
conflating I I think uh western values
about what the purpose of the government
is. Well, in common wealth, common will,
common wheel is common good. And this
notion that governments are about the
well-being of individuals. Okay. Well,
we're we're not in societies where we're
talking about individuals for openers.
Certainly uh not in uh Japan. Then
there's another well why the deaths so
huge. It's at the end of these wars,
you've broken the transportation system
that gets um produce to hungry mouths
and you've also removed so much um uh
manpower literally from the fields, you
aren't producing anything. So that
you're talking about mass starvation as
a result of having done a number of
previous years of warfare. And also this
uh mass starvation helps account for why
uh one side gets shattered and quits.
And then the thing that ought to give
everyone pause is okay if Japan's
economy was I don't know a tenth of ours
in World War II and these are the kind
of costs that they could inflict. Uh
watch it on getting into wars with
countries that you think you're vastly
superior to. Uh, it may not work out.
The costs are horrific. I mean, you're
illustrating the problems with this
continental order of taking territories.
This is how it goes. But sometimes other
people visit wars on you and then you're
into their world of hurt. And I mean, I
think it's it's like Angala Merkel or
Neville Chamberlain back in World War II
who's going surely these people don't
want to do this. It's going to wind up
being a blood bath. Surely they don't
want to. So Neville Chamberlain makes
the compromise at Munich thinking surely
this will be it. We'll compromise them
and they'll go wrong. They're going to
come in for the whole thing. Yeah. I I I
still feel like I don't understand the
um what exact So there's a couple of
options and maybe the the correct answer
isn't one of these, but one is that
there's just denialism of they genuinely
do not understand that they are going to
lose the war. Another is that look, they
know they're going to lose, but it's
better to like they would prefer to just
go out dying. Well, they're dead anyway,
so who cares, right? Well, this is the
problem with nuclear weapons. Push
someone into a a large corner and uh or
tight enough of corner. Maybe they think
that, well, it's my last day, so guess
what? It's going to be your last day,
too. How much should we question the the
demand for unconditional surrender
knowing that most of the debts in World
War II happened? Because look, if there
wasn't unconditional surrender, we maybe
we could reach a piece earlier. Most of
the debts could have been spared. Oh, I
think by the time uh those deaths are
Japanese deaths for us, uh we're looking
at these things and we've lost a lot of
people and our idea is hey, we're almost
there and we're not worried about
Japanese civilian deaths or Japanese
military deaths. We're looking these are
the people that have killed how many
Chinese and I don't believe China was
ever part of Japan. What were they doing
there? So then you're asking for tender
mercies out of Americans for for the
Japanese in those days? No.
After all that had happened. So yeah,
it's ugly by the time you've killed this
many people. The kind of bitterness on
both sides.
Was it a mistake to demilitarize Japan
after the war? Because why? A couple of
things. So one is look they they did
become an ally afterwards and if they
did have a military they could have
helped us in the Korean war the outcome
might have been different with military
help. Yeah it was the secret part. Yeah.
How do you think uh uh they were the
ones who knew about demining. So in the
after the we had a big military draw
down after the end of World War II and
the Navy really got cut back because it
was going to be all nuclear weapons and
the air force was going to deliver. So
the navy didn't get a whole bunch of
things that it cared about including
mind sweepers. So, um, when the North
Koreans are throwing a lot of mines
around, it's Japanese that are helping.
It was secret. That's why you don't know
about it. It's not your fault. It came
out in research recent. And another
thing, when MacArthur does his Inchan
landings, it's very tricky because the
tides are I don't know how many feet
like 30 foot tides. It's enormous. So,
you can really get stuck on mud flats if
you don't time that right know where
you're going. Who are the pilots who
bring it all in? It's Japanese. So, and
also they um they did they've always
they've always had a self-defense force
and they have a very competent navy.
It's called a self-defense force, but
anybody else would call it a navy, but
it it that then fits in with the what
the com the constitution says we're
supposed to have. So, but why is it a
mistake to demilitarize Japan? Another
reason is they had a vested interest in
making sure the communists don't take
over in China. And so they could have
provided some amount of support. If the
nationalists, it's obvious nationalists
are going to lose. At that point, maybe
they would have decided to support the
nationalists against the communists.
It's too late. They've gutted the
nationalist armies. That was um a
massive strategic error on the J. And
part of it comes from arrogance of uh
don't denigrate the other side. And so
the Japanese thought they could uh
China's a failed state. These people are
hopeless. They they can't decide what
they're doing. They got warlords
everywhere. we'll just push them around
and we'll get what we want. And they do
really well moving into Manuria. Manuria
is uh it's bigger than Germany and
France combined. The Japanese actually
stabilize it, do lots of investment.
That's why it becomes the most
industrialized part of Asia outside the
home islands more so than Shanghai. And
this is uh in the 30s. And so uh they're
looking at that things look pretty good
and they'll get away with it.
They didn't. Let's say in the couple of
decades before the war, if you looked at
somebody who's young and ambitious in
Japan, uh, the kind of person who might
come to Silicon Valley today if they're
in America, what um, what do they want
to do? Are they trying are they do they
want to join zibatus? Do they want to
like jo become a general of the
military? I have no this is social
history. I just don't I I I I don't
know. And you don't see a lot. Well,
yeah. I just truly don't know. It's it
has to do with there is so much to know
in this world that all of us all we can
do is know a corner of it. So my corner
has been a top down and actually if my
expertise I started out with a major
field in Russian history and a minor
field in Chinese history and then I
realized to deal with those two you had
to understand Japan. So you ask me in my
weak suit about the social history of
that country and I can't answer it. My
friend Agardo has a theory that look you
have um the
many of the powers that we fought in the
20th century uh Japan, Korea, Vietnam,
not fought directly but at least fought
over. We ended up becoming allies with
them later on. And in fact, they're some
of our best allies.
So there's two ways to think about it.
One is that we had especially good
diplomacy with them after the war. The
second is that despite having the same
interest, despite being in a position
where we should naturally have been
friends for we basically screwed to the
diplomacy beforehand and we we didn't
ally ourselves with the peaceful
factions within these countries.
Basically illustrates a failure of
diplomacy on our part that the natural
allies we weren't uh we we ended up
going to wars with. There's no matter of
diplomacy that's going to solve Hitler.
So it that one is uh one of the lessons
is don't let the the world global
economy melt down and when that happens
uh people who are not only Americans
will get desperate when that happens but
people who are poorer than Americans
which is lots of the world will be truly
desperate. So you don't want to do that.
As for why the Japanese and the Germans
are such wonderful allies as they are is
a uh
is a what's the word? It's a testament
to having a generous peace. So the peace
after that war was not to get even which
is what had been the peace in World War
I was the Germans had done all this
terrible stuff. We're going to make them
pay all kinds of money and it we're
going to tell them it was all their
fault and blah blah blah. that doesn't
work well. But rather uh the peace that
was of course what the the Russians did
to the East Germany, but for uh West
Germany is how do you reintegrate them
back into Europe and get them back on in
and uh and the Japanese as well and also
a a serendipitous effect of the Korean
War. The Japanese economy was a total
mess at the end of this war and the
United States of course is overt taxed
because there's Europe to rebuild and
there isn't enough money to do
everything. But when the Korean War
hits, which is immediately in 1950,
uh tons of the supplies were bought in
Japan and that's why the how the
Japanese economy initially is restored
is through the Korean War and then the
Vietnam War because it's the local place
to buy or more local in the United
States to buy a lot of supplies. So
that's another piece of uh why things
work out. And then there's also the
Germans and Japanese who live you were
asking about what a conscripts think. Uh
there are two brilliant generations in
Japan's modern history and one's the
Maji generation and the other's the
postwar world war II generation that did
this incredible makeover. And I think
all these wonderful high high quality
products they built. Like I I love my
Toyota.
I I when I rent an American car is I
can't find anything. I'm going to I'm
going to kill everyone as I'm trying to
figure out how to adjust something.
Whereas Toyota is like and we're good.
when you were showing the uh things we
learned from the diary entries of
different admirals or generals on the
Japanese side as you were going through
the archives and looking at these
things. I'm curious if um was yours when
did did were they writing knowing that
they were writing for future historians
or was that actually just a personal
recordkeeping thing or like what was the
motivation behind I did not read that
stuff in archives um Japanese archives I
was doing strictly diplomatic stuff the
Admiral uh Ugaki Matame's diary which is
the one thing I cited on these subjects
uh it's it was translated someone ran
into it and it was translated into
English and so I just read the whole
thing and then the other stuff, the
quotations, um I think I was ripping off
secondary sources where someone else had
done the archival research and then uh I
pulled those, but uh those are where the
quotations came from. So again, I
haven't done this deep read into uh all
of the Japanese thinking about all of
these uh of what motivated them in their
careers that I have not done. H was
there was there some big aha moment when
you were going through the through all
this Japanese stuff where like I get why
they did a certain um like why certain
things transpired in a certain way? Oh,
well, this lecture
uh when I came to the Naval War College
in 2000, they assigned me a couple of
lectures and and because it's a group
group talk class and everyone only gives
uh
two, three, four lectures and so I was
junior, I think I got one or two. And so
I was told to lecture on uh World War II
Pacific and I like oh great US Navy.
This will be a joke. me telling them
about World War II Pacific, right?
Because I'm a historian, major field
Russia, a minor field China, and I've
dabbled in Japan, and now I'm supposed
to talk about this. And so my husband
said, "Well, hey, I've taught this
survey of Japan. Read this bushido
stuff." And he had some of the books
hanging around the house. So I read that
and then I had read some basic things
about World War II. And then I I just
this is why I'm telling you I think it's
a useful way to approach other cultures
is read what they read. what are the the
key books and apparently these were key
books and then you go okay if I believe
this then I'm going to take western
analysis of going rather than mirror
imaging I'm going to um basically take
their software put it in here and my
brain and then say okay does this inform
me of what they're doing in the bonsai
charges it's like oh yeah that actually
makes sense now instead of saying what
are these nut jobs doing and it's
everyone on it's no no actually if you
believe these things uh then this would
explain how you're doing things. So
that's how that all came about. One
thing I was wondering about when you
were talking about the interervice
rivalries
is how what were the allies doing that
they avoided this not only between the
branches of the military but I mean
allies the word literally says it they
had to coordinate between Japan wasn't
coordinating with Germany in the way
that America was coordinating with
Britain. what what were like what how
were the institutions set up or the
culture set up that made this possible
to us a this institutional rivalry is
terrible all over the place but there's
another more concepts that are useful so
it's really helpful in looking at people
when you have disagreements with them is
who is their primary adversary or rival
not their secondary they probably have a
whole list of people who annoy them but
who's the number one and then where is
the primary theater of wherever that
disagreement is. Look at that. And then
on the disagreement, how big a deal is
it? Is it existential? Japan thought the
reason why it's undeterable that we
could we didn't figure out. They thought
their entire existence was at stake.
That they absolutely had to have
territory in China to survive. And now
whether that's correct or not is a
completely different story. If they
believe it, that's what's motivating
them. So, um,
on these when you're looking at the war
on the Allied side, who's the primary
enemy? Hitler. Where is the primary
theater? Germany. Even though there's
Japan. It was Germany first. And uh,
what about the ultimate goals? Well,
actually, that doesn't align at all. But
cuz the Russians want a communist
wonderland, we want everyone decolonized
and the British want the empire on which
the sun never sets. But they all shared
an intermediate objective that Hitler
has to go. And that's a superglue of an
alliance. Now let's look at flip it to
the axis. Okay, Italy. What does Italy
want? Roman Empire, whatever it is. So
who's the primary enemy? Well, Britain
because that's where British interests
are. Okay, Hitler. What's he all about?
He wants to do his Labour's run Nazi
wonderland all over Eurasia. So, who's
his primary enemy? That would be Russia.
Japan, what do they want? They want the
big Japanese empire. Who's their primary
enemy enemy? It's China. And then when
they get us in, they got a whole new
problem in their hands. None of this
align. And so, the Axis aren't going to
be trading many resources with each
other. Whereas the allies and it's
really it it goes back to your original
question about the British
uh part of their way of running wars is
you absolutely coordinate with allies.
You give them serious resources which is
what they finally figured out at the end
of the Napoleonic wars where they're
paying big money to support different
allies and then you got to put skin in
the games actually send your armies. So
the British and we take this from them.
We're we're students of the British on
this. Um do the massive sharing with Len
Lease and Stalin isn't sharing too much
with us. And then we've got the unified
commands with the British because
they're all about doing that. The
Russians won't even let us on their
territory to do things. And they're only
little bits with the Arctic U convoys
going up to Merman and it's hardly
anyone who's up there. So, uh, this is a
different cultural tradition and how to
deal with things. All right, we've come
full circle. I think that's a great
place to close things. This was
excellent. Thank you so much, Sarah.
Thank you for coming.
Thanks for watching. I hope you enjoyed
this episode and if you did, please
consider watching the other two episodes
in this series with Sarah. the former
one on India and how the USSR, US,
China, Pakistan all fought over India
during the Cold War and the next one is
about how Mao unified a continent and
ultimately caused the greatest
catastrophes in human history. If you're
interested in sponsoring this podcast,
go to dwarashpel.com/advertise
to learn more. Otherwise, it's super
helpful if you just share it with people
who you think might enjoy it. Send it on
your group chats, social media, friends.
It's all very helpful. All right, I'll
see you on the next one. Cheers.